MacGPG2 2.0.27 Final - Release Notes
==============================

Features
--------

### Support for hkps key servers and new key server default
* The default gpg.conf uses the hkps.pool.sks-keyservers.net key server by default. [#119]
* Tries to migrate old default configurations to connect to key servers via hkps.
* hkps sks key server pool is now new default.

### No version info to protect your security
* The new default will not show any version info in the comment field. For existing installations, you can disable showing version info using GPGPreferences. That way it's no longer possible to determine for an attacker which gnupg someone is using and can't abuse that information. [#131]

### Integrate gpg 2.0.27
*  Includes a fix for a DoS based on bogus and overlong key packets.
*  Adds better error reporting for keyserver problems.
*  Includes other bug fixes related to bogus keyrings.

Bugfixes
--------
* Bug in pinentry where the entered passphrase wasn't display properly with 'Show typing' enabled. [#145]
* Import filter rejected some keys on auto-import. [#134]
* gpg-agent timout when signing Mails. [#128]
* OS X 10.6: pinentry program entry not added to gpg-agent.conf in some rare occasions. [#125]
* scdaemon was misbehaving badly on OS X 10.10 leading to big problems for smartcard users. Happy to announce this is fixed. [#140]
* gpgkeys errors included in output destroying attachments. [#150]
* When installing GPG Suite or MacGPG2 the gpg.conf is no longer cluttered with superfulous entries of key server addresses. [#152]
* Creation of keys bigger than 4096bit was broken. After discussion on the gnupg mailing list we came to a mutual agreement and decided to remove this option.